# Reentry Research

An on-going archive of reentry studies. Includes international examples, as well.

# Authors

Created by [@billimarie](https://github.com/billimarie) for [@CLASPjustice](https://github.com/CLASPjustice).

# Table of Contents

- [General](#general)
- [Family](#family)
- [Public Support](#public-support)
- [Curriculum/Training](#curriculumtraining)
- [Substance Abuse](#substance-abuse)
- [Mental Health](#mental-health)
- [Cognitive Training](#cognitive-training)
- [Success/Effectiveness](#successeffectiveness)
- [Employment](#employment)
- [Housing](#housing)
- [Clothing](#clothing)
- [Family](#family)

## General

### A Description of the Self-Identified Needs, Service Expenditures, and Social Outcomes of Participants of a Prisoner-Reentry Program ([abstract](http://tpj.sagepub.com/content/91/3/347.short))

This study examines 122 ex-offenders who participated in Project Re-Connect, a 6-month, voluntary, prisoner-reentry program for inmates who served their maximum prison sentence. The needs most frequently self-identified by program participants prior to their return into the community included transportation, clothing, food, housing, and employment or vocational training. To help address these needs, program participants had access to US$3,000. These funds were largely directed toward the self-identified needs, with the greatest portion of expenditures applied to housing. Social outcomes, including employment, housing, and substance abuse, are examined for program participants. The study found that many ex-offenders will seek assistance through reentry programs, even when participation is voluntary, and that they are capable of self-identifying their service needs.

### Risk Factors for Overall Recidivism and Severity of Recidivism in Serious Juvenile Offenders ([abstract](http://ijo.sagepub.com/content/55/1/118.abstract))

This study was aimed at finding risk factors that predict both overall recidivism and severity of recidivism in serious juvenile offenders. Seventy static and dynamic risk factors associated with family characteristics, peers, psychopathology, substance abuse, psychological factors, and behavior during treatment were assessed with the Juvenile Forensic Profile in a sample of 728 juvenile offenders. Official reconviction data were used to register recidivism with a minimum time at risk of 2 years. Severity of offending was categorized according to the maximum sentence for the offense committed combined with expert opinion. Several risk factors for recidivism were found: past criminal behavior (number of past offenses, young age at first offense, unknown victim of past offenses), conduct disorder, family risk factors (poor parenting skills, criminal behavior in the family, a history of physical and emotional abuse), involvement with criminal peers, and lack of treatment adherence (aggression during treatment, lack of coping strategies). Having an unknown victim in past offenses, criminal behavior in the family, lack of treatment adherence, and lack of positive coping strategies were predictive of serious (violent) recidivism. The results are discussed in terms of their use for risk assessment and in improving treatment effect. Targeting poor parenting skills, involvement in criminal environment, lack of treatment adherence, and problematic coping strategies should reduce the severity of recidivism.

### Reentry Programming for High-Risk Offenders: Insights From Participants ([abstract](http://ijo.sagepub.com/content/early/2015/03/27/0306624X15578204.abstract))

The mass increase in imprisonment of the last two decades has led to an increasing number of adults released from prison. Scholarly accounts of prisoner reentry have demonstrated that incarcerated individuals face barriers on release from prison and that intervention programs are necessary to assist their transition to the community. Here, we build from the insights of previous research by examining how high-risk offenders perceive a reentry program. Using a qualitative approach, our findings suggest that procedural and substantive justice affect their satisfaction and involvement with the program. This study highlights the importance of providing employment opportunities, social support, and fair and respectful delivery of services to assist incarcerated individuals transitioning to the community.

### Recidivism among Participants of a Reentry Program for Prisoners Released without Supervision ([abstract](http://swr.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2012/12/26/swr.svs021.abstract))

As higher numbers of individuals are released from prison and rejoin society, reentry programs can help former offenders reintegrate into society without continuing to engage in crime. This quasi-experimental study examined whether participation in reentry programming was associated with reduced recidivism among offenders who were no longer under criminal justice supervision. Offenders who completed their sentences in prison were invited to participate in Project Re-Connect (PRC), a six-month, voluntary prisoner reentry program. Following participants' release from prison, PRC provided case management and direct monetary support to participants for up to six months. Survival analysis was used to compare recidivism rates between 122 PRC participants and 158 eligible nonparticipants. Cox regression coefficients indicated that program participation and having a high school diploma or its equivalent were associated with reduced likelihood of new convictions, whereas substance abuse was associated with higher risk of subsequent convictions. The implications for social work policy and practice are discussed.

### Paving the Way for Effective Reentry Practice: The Critical Role and Function of the Boundary Spanner ([abstract](http://tpj.sagepub.com/content/86/2/206.abstract))

In 2002, 69 sites were awarded funding under the Federal Partner's Serious and Violent Offender Reentry Initiative. This initiative calls for each site to design and implement an efficacious three-part program for the successful reintegration of offenders returning from prison into communities across the United States. The Kansas Department of Corrections and the University of Kansas worked together to design, implement, and evaluate the Kansas program, building into it a boundary spanner: that person who works within and between systems to effect integrated system change. This article explores the role of the boundary spanner in confronting the 21st-century challenges facing corrections and communities. A look at how boundary spanning in Kansas is helping to pave the way to achieving optimal systemic change illustrates its usefulness in reentry efforts.

### Examining the Effectiveness of a Restorative Justice Program for Various Types of Juvenile Offenders ([abstract](http://ijo.sagepub.com/content/57/9/1054.short?rss=1&ssource=mfr))

Restorative justice (RJ) programs have become widespread in the United States and in other countries. These programs are often seen as a viable alternative to traditional retributive processing, especially for minor, and sometimes more serious, forms of delinquency and adult criminality. The programs hold promise for achieving several goals, including increased community and victim involvement, greater satisfaction with the case outcomes, improved offender compliance, increased perceptions of fairness, and even recidivism reduction. Meta-analyses have demonstrated varying degrees of program success in recidivism reduction, which may in part reflect differential effectiveness of the RJ approach for various kinds of offenders. This study examined whether an RJ program for juvenile offenders had differential impacts on recidivism across various offender characteristics (including age, gender, racial group, offending history, and current offense). Results generally support the effectiveness of the program for many types of offenders. Implications for future research and potential improvements to the RJ model are discussed.

## Public Support

### Chicago Communities and Prisoner Reentry ([full](http://webarchive.urban.org/UploadedPDF/311225_chicago_communities.pdf))

When men and women leave prison and return home, they are confronted with an array of challenges, such as securing stable living arrangements, finding employment, and avoiding criminal activity. Perhaps a less obvious factor that may affect their success is the nature of the place to which they return, specifically the local community area or neighborhood and its distinctive characteristics. Both the availability and cost of housing and the availability and proximity of jobs in areas where ex-prisoners return may influence post-release outcomes. Accessibility of social services, such as health care and substance abuse treatment, is also likely to affect their reentry experience and subsequent recidivism. Indeed, for many ex-prisoners, the community plays an important role in their reintegration.
Forty-five percent of ex-prisoners said that they did not return to the neighborhood they lived in before they were sent to prison, primarily because they wanted to avoid problems in their old neighborhood or because their family had moved. n Former prisoners who resided in neighborhoods that were perceived as unsafe and where drug selling was a problem were more likely to use drugs, were less likely to be employed, and were more likely to return to prison.

Community residents, reentry policy-makers and practitioners, and ex-prisoners believe that the Chicago communities receiving men and women released from prison are unprepared and lack needed services for this population.

Community residents and reentry policy-makers and practitioners suggested that parole officers would better serve former prisoners and their communities if they had smaller caseloads and provided a combination of supportive services and close supervision.

Chicago neighborhoods receiving former prisoners could benefit from some community development assistance, including building coalitions of local organizations, securing additional resources, and engaging local residents in the process.

### Rethinking Recidivism: A Communication Approach to Prisoner Reentry ([abstract](http://jax.sagepub.com/content/7/2/188.abstract))

Prisoner reentry is one of the main criminal justice challenges confronting the United States, especially as the costs of recidivism and incarceration take increasing tolls on city and state budgets, and the effects of criminal activity are felt by families and local communities. Our goal in this article is to develop an alternative approach to prisoner reentry. Our contention is that many reentry efforts focus mainly on the visible effects of recidivism (e.g., parole violations, criminal behavior, and treatment compliance) but do not get at the underlying causes that lead to recidivism in the first place. While traditional methods of surveillance and control focus on the observable problems of recidivism, we argue that the underlying cause is a communication breakdown of being cut off from networks and meaningful relationships that provide the necessary social capital needed for successful reintegration. Therefore, we propose reframing prisoner reentry from a communication perspective, and developing subsequent communication solutions. We suggest that mentoring is one such communication solution, and we present a case study of a successful reentry mentoring program. Our case study uses a mixed research methodology, including quantitative data from a third-party assessment and qualitative data from in-depth interviews. Our key conclusions are that mentoring provides important communication links to enable coordinated service delivery for ex-prisoners, and that mentoring is a valuable conversational resource to help socially construct a favorable postrelease environment for successful reentry. Our target audience are those interested in prisoner reentry and reforming the overall criminal justice system.

### Preventing Parolees From Returning to Prison Through Community-Based Reintegration ([abstract](http://cad.sagepub.com/content/52/4/551.abstract))

In the late 1990s, California legislators funded a statewide, community-based correctional program intended to reduce parolee recidivism. Overseen by the California Department of Corrections, the PreventingParolee Crime Program (PPCP) provided literacy training, employment services, housing assistance, and substance abuse treatment to tens of thousands of parolees. The study found that the PPCP produced modest reductions in reincarcerations and parole absconding, creating the potential for substantial long-term cost savings for California taxpayers. Because the PPCP's positive effects were strongest for parolees who completed their services, future program designers and administrators should consider including mechanisms to improve parolee retention and service utilization. This study also points out the potential benefits of incorporating rigorous evaluation plans into the design and implementation of correctional rehabilitation programs.

### Measuring Public Support for Prisoner Reentry Options ([abstract](http://ijo.sagepub.com/content/60/12/1406.abstract))

Few topics have been discussed more extensively or feverishly within correctional academic and professional circles in the past few decades than prisoner reentry. Although program and policy evaluations have been conducted, a lack of public support for prisoner reentry initiatives could undermine the sustainability of prisoner reentry as a large-scale movement. Interestingly, no multivariate, explanatory analyses of the correlates of support for prisoner reentry policies could be found in the literature. This omission is due in part to the absence of clear psychometric measures to assess support. The current study examines the data obtained from a sample of residents in a Midwestern state to determine the dimensionality of support for prisoner reentry interventions using both exploratory factor analysis (EFA) and ordinary least squares (OLS) regression. Specifically, our expectation is that the following three-factor structure will be identified: (a) support for transitional programs aimed at building skills and knowledge to handle the obstacles of the prison-to-community transitional process, (b) support for post-release transitional housing units, and (c) opposition to denying offenders housing opportunities. Our results support a three-factor model. The implications of these findings for future research are discussed.

### Social Capital Among Women Offenders: Examining the Distribution of Social Networks and Resources ([abstract](http://ccj.sagepub.com/content/18/2/167.abstract))

Studies investigating the trials and tribulations of women offenders in the United States are becoming increasingly common. One theme in the literature is that successful reentry of women offenders is dependent on support of social networks. Generally, social theorists posit that a variety of positive outcomes is associated with healthy social networks. For example, networks provide social structural resources (“social capital”), which in turn promote acquisition of skills and knowledge (“human capital”) to achieve goals that would otherwise be unattainable. This article investigates the differential distribution of social networks in terms of size and resources (i.e., support) across social groupings (e.g., race, age) using a sample of adult female felons. The results show that (a) better educated and higher income offenders are members of larger social networks, and (b) poorly educated women offenders, women with annual legal incomes below $8,000, and younger offenders have access to lower levels of support.

### Support for Restorative Justice in a Sample of U.S. University Students ([abstract](http://ijo.sagepub.com/content/early/2015/07/28/0306624X15596386.abstract))

Theories of restorative justice suggest that the practice works best when offenders are enmeshed in multiple interdependencies or attachments to others and belong to a culture that facilitates communitarianism instead of individualism. Restorative justice principles and practices are thus believed to be incongruent with the individualistic culture and legal system of the United States, especially compared with that of nations like Australia and Japan. Using a nonprobability convenience sample of students enrolled in a large public university in the United States, our study examines attitudes toward restorative justice as a fair and just process for reintegrating offenders and meeting the needs of victims. Results indicate that our sample holds less punitive attitudes than citizens in either Australia or Japan. Our findings are discussed in light of recent policy shifts in the United States that suggest a concerted move toward decarceration following the 2008 recession.

### Waiting to be Caught: The Devolution of Health for Women Newly Released from Jail ([abstract](http://cjr.sagepub.com/content/26/2/143.abstract))

Traditionally understood ideas about health and criminal behaviors are integrally linked within an individual's health, as well as a community's health. In a time when women are increasingly jailed, it is important to examine the life ways of women who are newly released. This study, using participatory action research and critical hermeneutic data analysis techniques, examined women's health and social experiences following their release from jail. Findings suggest that women experienced an onward and downward momentum of health indices, or devolution, with regard to economic status, physical and mental health status, intimate and family relationships, and general social functioning. It is argued that basic public health and community nursing interventions would provide a more seamless transition from jail back into community and would positively impact the individual and community health issues that are embedded within the criminal activity.

## Curriculum/Training

### Changing Criminal Attitudes Among Incarcerated Offenders: Initial Examination of a Structured Treatment Program ([abstract](http://ijo.sagepub.com/content/60/12/1425.abstract))

The present study investigated the effect of a criminal attitude treatment program to changes on measured criminal attitudes and postprogram recidivism. The criminal attitude program (CAP) is a standardized therapeutic curriculum consisting of 15 modules offering 44 hr of therapeutic time. It was delivered by trained facilitators to a total of 113 male offenders incarcerated in one of five state correctional institutions. Pretreatment and posttreatment comparisons were made on standardized measures of criminal attitudes, response bias, and motivation for lifestyle changes. Results found statistically significant lower criminal attitudes at posttreatment that were unaffected by response bias. There were also increases in motivation for lifestyle changes, but these did not reach statistical significance. Fifty-seven participants were released into the community following the program and were eligible for recidivism analyses. Comparisons between participants who completed the CAP and those who did not complete the CAP revealed 7% lower rearrest among CAP completers. Although preliminary, these results indicate that the CAP had a positive effect on changes to criminal attitudes and recidivism. The findings are discussed in terms of conceptual and practical considerations in the assessment and treatment of criminal attitudes among offenders.

### A Strengths-Based Approach to Prisoner Reentry: The Fresh Start Prisoner Reentry Program ([abstract](http://ijo.sagepub.com/content/60/11/1298.short?rss=1&ssource=mfr), [full](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/274089460_A_Strengths-Based_Approach_to_Prisoner_Reentry_The_Fresh_Start_Prisoner_Reentry_Program))

Scholars have called for a strengths-based approach to prisoner reentry, yet there are few available program models that outline how to integrate this approach into the current reentry program landscape. The present article highlights a strengths-based prisoner reentry program that provided services to men both pre- and post-release from prison to the community in the United States. Qualitative findings from focus groups provide preliminary support for the strengths-based approach and highlight men’s strengths and needs as well as challenges related to the program’s implementation. The reentry program then drew from participants’ reports to inform program development activities. Implications and recommendations for integrating strengths-based approaches into prisoner reentry interventions are discussed.

## Substance Abuse

### Access to Recovery and Recidivism Among Former Prison Inmates ([abstract](http://ijo.sagepub.com/content/early/2015/09/16/0306624X15606688.abstract))

Access to Recovery (ATR) is a Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA)–funded initiative that offers a mix of clinical and supportive services for substance abuse. ATR clients choose which services will help to overcome barriers in their road to recovery, and a recovery consultant provides vouchers and helps link the client to these community resources. One of ATR’s goals was to provide services to those involved in the criminal justice system in the hopes that addressing substance abuse issues could reduce subsequent criminal behaviors. This study examines this goal by looking at recidivism among a sample of clients in one state’s ATR program who returned to the community after incarceration. Results suggest that there were few differential effects of service selections on subsequent recidivism. However, there are significant differences in recidivism rates among the agencies that provided ATR services. Agencies with more resources and a focus on prisoner reentry had better recidivism outcomes than those that focus only on substance abuse services.

### Factors Associated With Community Corrections Involvement Among Formerly Incarcerated People in Recovery ([abstract](http://cjp.sagepub.com/content/early/2016/04/13/0887403416644012.abstract))

The current study examined whether current community supervision status was associated with differences in demographic characteristics, lifetime substance use patterns, and criminal history among a sample of formerly incarcerated individuals with a history of substance use problems. Results of multivariate analyses revealed participants on community supervision were more likely to have graduated from high school or earned a General Education Development test credential (GED; odds ratio [OR] = 1.60; 95% confidence interval [CI] = [0.15, 17.24]) and were less likely to have a history of psychiatric hospitalization (OR = 0.88; 95% CI = [0.08, 9.35]). These characteristics may be proxies for social and emotional functioning that influence eligibility for community supervision. Despite these apparent advantages, the community supervision group did not significantly differ from the formerly incarcerated group without current justice involvement on lifetime substance use patterns or criminal history, suggesting formerly incarcerated individuals with substance use disorders may require more intensive interventions to promote existing strengths.

## Mental Health

### How the prison-to-community transition risk environment influences the experience of men with co-occurring mental health and substance use disorder ([abstract](http://anj.sagepub.com/content/early/2015/12/10/0004865815620703.abstract))

Previous research has established that people with severe mental illness and co-occurring substance use disorder leaving prison have multiple and complex health, social and economic challenges. How the criminal justice and mental health systems influence the individual prison-to-community transition experience of this population is less well understood. This paper draws on unique qualitative data from a study of 18 men with co-occurring severe mental illness and substance use disorder leaving prison in Queensland, Australia. A repeat in-depth interview method was used to explore the experiences of the men in prison just prior to release and at two points post-release. Two themes are discussed from analysis of interviews: “risk behaviour and relapse” and “once a criminal always a risk”. The findings suggest that individual risk behaviour is structured within a transition risk environment that reduces individual agency, thus facilitating a vicious cycle of release, relapse and reincarceration.

### Rural Jail Reentry and Mental Health: Identifying Challenges for Offenders and Professionals ([abstract](http://tpj.sagepub.com/content/96/1/27.abstract))
The current study examines the challenges of rural jail reentry including mental health issues faced by offenders returning from jails. This study compared a sample of 200 current jail inmates, 166 probation/parole officers working in rural areas, and 21 rural treatment staff working with former offenders in a treatment capacity. Overall, inmates found structural issues (e.g., employment, housing, ability to pay fines) to be more challenging while practitioners were more likely to rank personal issues (e.g., lack of motivation, temptation to reoffend) as more problematic. Various themes emerged relating to mental health issues including health insurance, medication, transportation, and co-occurrence with substance abuse. Policy implications and recommendations for the future are discussed.

### Examining the Role of Familial Support During Prison and After Release on Post-Incarceration Mental Health ([abstract](http://ijo.sagepub.com/content/60/1/3.abstract))

A significant number of prisoners experience mental health problems, and adequate social support is one way that facilitates better mental health. Yet, by being incarcerated, social support, particularly family support, is likely to be strained or even negative. In this study, we examine whether familial support—either positive or negative—in-prison and after release affects mental health outcomes post-release. Using the Serious and Violent Offender Reentry Initiative (SVORI) dataset, we regress post-release mental health on in-prison familial support, post-incarceration familial support, and changes in familial support. We find that while in-prison family support does not affect mental health, post-release familial support does. Also, experiencing an increase in negative familial support is associated with lower post-incarceration mental health. We conclude with a discussion of policies which may facilitate better familial support environments.

## Cognitive Training

### Evaluation of the Positive Re-Entry in Corrections Program: A Positive Psychology Intervention With Prison Inmates ([abstract](http://ijo.sagepub.com/content/59/9/1006.abstract))

Two groups of male inmates (n = 31, n = 31) participated in the Positive Re-Entry in Corrections Program (PRCP). This positive psychology intervention focused on teaching offenders skills that facilitate re-entry into the community. Offenders participated in weekly lectures, discussions, and homework assignments focused on positive psychology principles. The two groups differed in duration of treatment (8 weeks and 12 weeks). Participants completed pre- and post-intervention measures of gratitude, hope, and life satisfaction. Using a 2 × 2 mixed design ANOVA, we hypothesized that the intervention (with two between-subjects levels of 8 and 12 weeks) and duration (with two repeated measures levels of pre and post) of treatment would moderate pre- to post-intervention change. Results indicated significant differences on pre- and post-intervention scores for both groups of offenders on all measures. The analysis did not yield statistically significant differences between groups, demonstrating no additive benefits from the inclusion of four additional sessions, thus saving time and money for correctional programming and funding. This research supports the use of positive psychology in prison interventions.

### An Evaluation of the Impact of Goal Setting and Cell Phone Calls on Juvenile Rearrests ([abstract](http://ijo.sagepub.com/content/early/2015/05/21/0306624X15588549.abstract))

Using a sample of 256 juvenile offenders who were randomly assigned to treatment or control groups, this study evaluates a cognitive-behavioral program that combines cognitive training, goal setting, and a phone-coach follow-up. The training involved six classroom sessions where participants received instruction and help in creating individualized goals. After attending the classes, participants received automated phone calls twice a day for up to a year. During the year following the program, the treatment and control groups were not significantly different in whether or not they were rearrested or in total rearrests. However, the total number of calls received had a significant negative association with whether or not they were rearrested for a felony and with the total number of felony rearrests.

### A Multiyear Follow-Up Study Examining the Effectiveness of a Cognitive Behavioral Group Therapy Program on the Recidivism of Juveniles on Probation ([abstract](http://ijo.sagepub.com/content/59/3/259.abstract))

The present study evaluated the long-term effectiveness of a cognitive behavioral group therapy program titled Community Opportunity Growth. This study monitored juvenile delinquents’ recidivism across a 7-year time period, with the average length to follow-up being 39 months. It was hypothesized that program graduates (N = 178) would have a significantly lower recidivism rate than a control group (program nonstarters; N = 66) and program dropouts (whose predisposing factors may have influenced their program participation; N = 150). Analyses controlled for sex, ethnicity, age, prior petitions, highest class of prior petition, and months to follow-up. Results show a general trend indicating the long-term effectiveness of the program as graduates had a lower incidence of petitions at follow-up compared with dropouts and fewer petitions compared with the other two groups.

## Success/Effectiveness

### Successful Reentry: What Differentiates Successful and Unsuccessful Parolees? ([abstract](http://ijo.sagepub.com/content/54/5/667.abstract))

In this research the authors examine the reentry of 51 parolees during the 3 years following their release from prison. The objective is to gain increased understanding of what differentiates successful parolees from those who fail. Success is defined as being discharged from parole by 3 years after release. The study examines the extent to which drug treatment, friendships, work, family bonds, and age are associated with reentry success. Contrary to expectations, it is found that closeness to mother, closeness to father, having a partner, being a parent, and education level are not associated with parole success. Those who succeed on parole are more likely to have taken a substance abuse class while in prison and on release tend to spend more time in enjoyable activities with friends. Among the employed, those that worked at least 40 hours a week are more likely to complete parole successfully. Qualitative data indicate that successful parolees had more support from family and friends and had more self-efficacy, which help them stay away from drugs and peers who use drugs. The findings are consistent with an integrated life course theory.

### Reentry for Serious and Violent Offenders: An Analysis of Program Attrition ([abstract](http://cjp.sagepub.com/content/20/2/154.abstract))

With approximately 650,000 prisoners returning home each year, the discussion surrounding how to best plan for their transition home has increased. Traditional supervision-focused parole services have a limited ability to adequately address all of the exprisoners needs and issues. As such, in 2003, the federal government established the Serious and Violent Offender Reentry Initiative (SVORI). The SVORI is a large-scale program that provided states with federal funding to develop or enhance existing reentry services. The current study builds on the previous research by examining factors associated with program failure for both the institutional and community phases of a SVORI-funded reentry program. The results indicate that those individuals who were unemployed, who did not reside with family members, and who were higher risk were significantly more likely to fail the program during the community reentry phase.

### Reentry of Emerging Adults: Adolescent Inmates' Transition Back Into the Community ([abstract](http://jar.sagepub.com/content/24/4/453.abstract))

This article is based on the sociological analysis of the experiences and perspectives of five young men making the transition out of one state's end-of-the-line maximum security juvenile correctional facility and attempting to reenter the community as emerging adults. As part of a larger ethnographic study of violent offenders in a cottage, these young men shared their observations as they faced their futures with both fear and hope. Upon their release from the institution, they found few people or services to rely on, and they struggled the best way they knew to cope with new and frightening responsibilities of independence and emerging adulthood.

### The Effectiveness of Parole Supervision: Use of Propensity Score Matching to Analyze Reincarceration Rates in Kentucky ([abstract](http://cjp.sagepub.com/content/early/2015/10/05/0887403415609717.abstract))

Recent years have seen increasing concerns about the importance of offender reentry and how to best facilitate ex-offenders remaining crimefree. Common responses have been to enhance punitiveness, and to decrease resources and support services for ex-offenders. Results have been consistently high levels of recidivism, and consequently increasingly punitive responses. The present study examines whether a cohort of offenders released to the community in Kentucky either under parole supervision or at the expiration of their sentences are more likely to be reincarcerated within a 5-year period. The participants of each cohort were constructed into two groups using propensity score matching to control for differences between them.

### Economic Impediments to Women’s Success on Parole: “We Need Someone on Our Side” ([abstract](http://tpj.sagepub.com/content/94/3/365.abstract))

The number of women under community supervision has increased in recent years. However, empirical research on women parolees’ experiences is quite limited. Women parolees are faced with daunting challenges that may impede their success on parole. Using face-to-face interviews with 60 women parolees in a Southern state, this qualitative study examined the perceived barriers to women’s success on parole. Women parolees identified economic variables as critical barriers to their parole adjustment.

### Is Corrections Correcting? An Examination of Prisoner Rehabilitation Policy and Practice in Queensland ((abstract](http://anj.sagepub.com/content/39/1/109.abstract))

This article provides an analysis of the policy and practice of prisoner rehabilitation in Queensland, and the extent to which they accord with international best practice. Actual practice was identified through interviews and written submissions from 20 ex-prisoners and 18 prisoner service providers (including two past staff members from Queensland prisons), as well as through an examination of reported judicial review decisions and Department of Corrective Services statistics. The results demonstrate that although the legislation and procedures suggest that a best practice system of prisoner rehabilitation exists in Queensland, there is a significant gulf between policy and practice. Far from being sufficiently prepared for release, Queensland prisoners are generally released directly from high security facilities into a community which they have great difficulty reintegrating into. The results suggest that the corrective services system in Queensland is not succeeding in fulfilling its primary purpose, ‘correction’, or in meeting its well-publicised goal of ensuring community safety.

### Factors That Hinder Offender Reentry Success: A View From Community Corrections Officers ([abstract](http://ijo.sagepub.com/content/55/2/287.abstract))

Within the institutional correctional literature, much has been written about the differences in authority between correctional officers and inmates. Recently, researchers have begun exploring the differences in authority between ex-offenders and community corrections officers (CCOs). Emerging literature in the correctional field suggests that ex-offenders perceive CCOs as being socially distant from them and have doubt as to whether CCOs are genuine in their attempts to assist the ex-offenders in reintegrating back into the community. Using qualitative data from a sample of 132 federal and state corrections officers in Seattle, Washington, this investigation advances previous research by examining officers’ perceptions of social distance with their clients. Results from the survey responses and policy implications are presented.

### Supervision Strategies and Approaches for Female Parolees: Examining the Link Between Unmet Needs and Parolee Outcome ([abstract](http://cad.sagepub.com/content/52/3/450.abstract))

A number of parolees are returning to the community with programming needs that may not have been addressed during their incarceration; these unmet needs may subsequently affect their successful reintegration into the community. Although there is an increasing female parole population, there has been a paucity of research concerning female parolees. The current study examines the types of needs identified at intake from a sample of 546 female parolees. The results revealed the following. First, if a parolee was employed, had stable living arrangements, and was assessed as needing and receiving some type of drug and/or alcohol program intervention, she was less likely to fail on parole. Second, many of these women were underassessed for having needs for drug and alcohol treatment as well as employment, housing, and other assistance. This underassessment may be because of an increasing emphasis on parole supervision (i.e., custody) rather than treatment in parole agencies.

### Examining the Predictors of Recidivism Among Men and Women Released From Prison in Ohio ([abstract](http://cjb.sagepub.com/content/37/12/1377.abstract))

Deficits in education, employment, and housing as well as the lack of treatment programs pose significant barriers to the successful reentry of inmates released from prison. This research uses a representative sample of inmates released from Ohio prisons to examine the extent to which these factors are associated with recidivism. Furthermore, building on prior research, it examines potential differences in these predictors by gender. The findings provide support for Petersilia’s suggestions and indicate that employment, housing, and the completion of some forms of treatment are negatively associated with multiple measures of recidivism. Also, no gender differences in the predictors examined here are detected, suggesting that the factors likely behave in a gender-neutral manner.

### An Experimental Evaluation of the Impact of Intensive Supervision on the Recidivism of High-Risk Probationers ([abstract](http://cad.sagepub.com/content/early/2014/11/11/0011128714555757.abstract))

This article reports the results of an experimental evaluation of the impact of Intensive Supervision Probation (ISP) on probationer recidivism. Participants, who were assessed at an increased likelihood of committing serious crimes and not ordered to specialized supervision, were randomly assigned to ISP (n = 447) or standard probation (n = 385). ISP probationers received more restrictive supervision and experienced more office contacts, home visitations, and drug screenings. After 12 months, there was no difference in offending. This equivalence holds across multiple types of crimes, including violent, non-violent, property, and drug offenses, as well as in a survival analysis conducted for each offense type. ISP probationers absconded from supervision, were charged with technical violations, and were incarcerated at significantly higher rates. Policy implications for these results are discussed.

### An Outcome Evaluation of a Midwestern Prisoner Reentry Initiative ([abstract](http://cjp.sagepub.com/content/26/3/293.abstract))

In recent years, correctional and community agencies have developed and promoted an array of policies and programs aimed at successfully facilitating the offender transition from prison to community. One model, the Reentry Partnership Initiative (RPI), emphasizes building collaborative partnerships in an effort to deliver a coordinated and continuous stream of supervision, services, and support during the transitional process and includes institutional, structured reentry, and community reintegration phases. The current study evaluates the outcome of an RPI-style model called the Missouri Prisoner Reentry Initiative (MPRI). The impact of MPRI participation was examined by comparing the reimprisonment of two MPRI treatment groups to the reimprisonment of a reference group having no MPRI involvement. The MPRI groups consisted of (a) offenders entering all MPRI phases and (b) offenders receiving MPRI assistance exclusively inside prison. MPRI was not successful in reducing reimprisonment for males but had benefits for females who entered all MPRI phases.

## Employment

### The Perceived Employability of Ex-Prisoners and Offenders ([abstract](http://ijo.sagepub.com/content/52/6/673.abstract))

A large-scale study was conducted to examine the perceived employability of ex-prisoners and offenders. Four participant groups comprising 596 (50.4%) employers, 234 (19.8%) employment service workers, 176 (14.9%) corrections workers, and 175 (14.8%) prisoners and offenders completed a questionnaire assessing the likelihood of a hypothetical job seeker's both obtaining and maintaining employment; the importance of specific skills and characteristics to employability; and the likelihood that ex-prisoners, offenders, and the general workforce exhibit these skills and characteristics. Apart from people with an intellectual or psychiatric disability, those with a criminal background were rated as being less likely than other disadvantaged groups to obtain and maintain employment. In addition, ex-prisoners were rated as being less likely than offenders and the general workforce to exhibit the skills and characteristics relevant to employability. Implications for the preparation and support of ex-prisoners and offenders into employment are discussed, together with broader community-wide initiatives to promote reintegration.

### Does the Concentration of Parolees in a Community Impact Employer Attitudes Toward the Hiring of Ex-Offenders? ([abstract](http://cjp.sagepub.com/content/24/1/71.abstract))

Finding legitimate employment upon release from prison is an important, yet daunting, aspect of offender reentry. Researchers have argued that negative employer attitudes toward hiring ex-offenders act as a barrier during the job search process. This study explored existing attitudes of employers in their willingness to hire ex-offenders in the current labor market and determined whether these attitudes were dependent on the concentration of ex-offenders in the surrounding geographical community. Mail surveys and follow-up telephone contacts with a random sample of businesses that typically employ ex-offenders within 12 Texas zip-codes (six high parolee concentrations, six low parolee concentrations) were conducted. Respondents indicated a general willingness to hire ex-offenders, which did not vary by concentration of parolees in the surrounding area but was found to vary by the conviction offense. Other significant predictors included the respondent’s age and arrest history, whether their business was currently hiring, and whether the business had previously hired an ex-offender.

### Not Just Any Job Will Do: A Study on Employment Characteristics and Recidivism Risks After Release ([abstract](http://ijo.sagepub.com/content/early/2016/03/11/0306624X16636141.abstract))

Ex-prisoners’ recidivism risks are high. Several theories state that employment can reduce these risks but emphasize that the protective role of employment is conditional on job qualities (work intensity, job duration, etc.). Longitudinal research on the role of employment in ex-prisoners’ recidivism patterns is scarce, and most existing work used a simplistic employment measure (i.e., employed vs. unemployed), leaving the topic of job quality underexplored. This study examines the association between employment characteristics and recidivism among Dutch ex-prisoners. Using longitudinal data of the Prison Project (n = 714), we found that not just any job, but particularly stable employment and jobs with a higher occupational level could help reduce crime rates among these high-risk offenders. Many ex-prisoners face a human capital deficit that complicates the guidance to high-quality jobs. It might, however, be possible to help place ex-prisoners in stable employment.

### Returning to a Former Employer: A Potentially Successful Pathway to Ex-prisoner Re-employment ([abstract](http://bjc.oxfordjournals.org/content/56/4/668.abstract))

This study examines to what extent ex-prisoners return to their pre-prison job and identifies factors that facilitate or hinder this outcome. Data from a longitudinal study of Dutch pretrial detainees were analyzed to examine whether those who were employed at the time of arrest returned to their pre-prison employer, found new employment, or remained jobless in the first half year following prison. Results show that one in three employed ex-prisoners found employment through their previous employer. The findings emphasize the relevance of recent employment ties for successful reintegration and add nuance to the assumption that employers are reluctant to hire this group of workers.

### Recidivism Among Participants of an Employment Assistance Program for Prisoners and Offenders ([abstract](http://ijo.sagepub.com/content/58/3/348.abstract))

Recidivism outcomes were examined over a 2-year postrelease period for participants of an Australian employment assistance program. The voluntary 12-month program operated from 17 Victorian correctional locations, 7 prisons, and 10 community corrections locations, targeting participants at moderate to high risk of reoffending. Recidivism outcomes included simple rates of reoffending for the whole program (N = 3,034 registered participants) and analyses of rate and seriousness of reoffending and extent of poly-offending for a random sample of 600 program participants and 600 nonparticipants. Offending among program participants’ pre- and post-registration was also investigated. Results showed a very low rate of reoffending (7.46%) for the entire program participant group while engaged in the program. As well, program participants had significantly lower levels of recidivism than nonparticipants, and postregistration offending was significantly lower than preregistration offending. Findings indicate that long-term postrelease employment support programs provide positive benefits in terms of reduced reoffending.

## Clothing

### Clothing makes the man: Impression management and prisoner reentry ([abstract](http://pun.sagepub.com/content/18/2/220.abstract))

Building on the wealth of prisoner reentry scholarship focusing on the process of transitioning home, this article examines clothing and reentry, and the complex interplay of how clothing has meaning for both the wearer and the viewer during this process. Prisoner reintegration research demonstrates that former prisoners are in need of a multitude of items, yet the purpose of clothing as a function in impression management is rarely considered. This article contends that clothing plays an important role in mediating social interactions for men returning to the community. Drawing on ethnographic data from a two-year interdisciplinary project in Newark, New Jersey, we present empirical evidence that clothing supports substantial notions of identity and performance. Through the notion of liminality, we explore three typologies that reveal how clothing pertains to male performance and social practice: (1) loss of identity, (2) reclamation of identity, and (3) creation of identity. We find that clothing is a tool through which former prisoners are able to reengage with society as someone other than as a former prisoner.

## Housing

### Homelessness and Reentry: A Multisite Outcome Evaluation of Washington State’s Reentry Housing Program for High Risk Offenders ([abstract](http://cjb.sagepub.com/content/41/4/471.abstract))

Each year many offenders are released homeless putting them at great risk of being returned to prison. To reduce the likelihood of recidivism, Washington State implemented the Reentry Housing Pilot Program (RHPP) to provide housing assistance for high risk/high need offenders leaving prison without a viable place to live. This study provides a longitudinal (2008-2011), multisite outcome evaluation that considers how ex-offenders in the RHPP program (n = 208), who were provided housing and wraparound services, compared with similar offenders released with an elevated risk of homelessness while being traditionally supervised (n = 208). Findings show that the RHPP program was successful in significantly reducing new convictions and readmission to prison for new crimes, but had no significant effect on revocations. In addition, results showed that periods of homelessness significantly elevated the risk of recidivism for new convictions, revocations, and readmission to prison. The authors recommend that subsidized housing for high risk offenders become a central part of coordinated responses to reentry.

### Predicting Two Types of Recidivism Among Newly Released Prisoners: First Addresses as “Launch Pads” for Recidivism or Reentry Success ([abstract](http://cad.sagepub.com/content/early/2014/11/11/0011128714555760.abstract))

Separate studies have shown that a variety of postrelease housing placements for returning prisoners can significantly influence recidivism. Research has also found that contextual factors such as economic disadvantage can also significantly predict recidivism. This study combines those lines of research by examining the effects of five categories of postrelease housing placements as well as contextual measures of economic disadvantage on recidivism for newly released Minnesota state prisoners. Using multilevel analysis techniques, this research found that with one exception, certain postrelease housing situations, along with several other individual-level control variables, were more robust predictors of recidivism than contextual measures of disadvantage and poverty. This study highlights the significant impact that postrelease housing placements can have on the reentry process.

## Family

### Family Support in the Prisoner Reentry Process ([abstract](http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1300/J076v43n01_05))

This paper examines the role of family in the prisoner reintegration process, exploring the views of soon-to-be-released prisoners regarding the family support they expect to receive as well as their assessments of how supportive family members actually were after release. It draws on a study of 413 male prisoners returning to the cities of Baltimore and Chicago who completed self-administered surveys one to two months prior to their release and one-on-one interviews between two and three months after release from prison. The study found that released prisoners relied on family members extensively for housing, financial support, and emotional support. For the most part, the pre-release expectations of family support among these respondents were exceeded after release. Furthermore, respondents placed greater value on the role of family in their reintegration process after their release from prison than they did when they were still incarcerated. This suggests that families are an important influence in the reentry process and that they provide much-needed support to returning prisoners.
